Well, good morning.
Looks like a lot of you stayed up
kind of late and aren't here yet.
So welcome to this session.
This session is really just the,
if you think of the session
that I gave yesterday,
which was session 111,
talking about how to create
a great citizen on Mac OS X,
citizen application on Mac OS X.
And I said in that session that
I wouldn't talk about APIs,
talk about conceptual ideas.
This session is all about
talking through that material,
but looking at it from
the Carbon API level.
And so I'd like to bring on
stage Guy Fullerton from the
High Level Toolbox team at Apple,
and he's going to talk through
the specifics of some of that
material as it relates to the APIs.
Guy?
Thanks.
First things first,
did anybody bring me any donuts?
No?
Okay.
I guess everybody who got here
early saw my presentation last
year and knows how fast I talk,
how fast I'm going to
get through this stuff.
That's me.
So I want to tell you a little story that
you've probably all witnessed firsthand,
and it's the story of
a Carbon application.
Most Carbon applications start off as an
interface lib application on Mac OS 9,
and you begin the Carbonization process.
And that's fairly straightforward,
and it takes you anywhere from a
couple weeks to maybe a couple months.
But finally you get through the opacity
issues and weaning yourself off of some
APIs and starting to use other APIs,
and you get it so it actually
runs well on Carbon lib.
And usually part of the
way through that process,
you get your application running well
enough to try running it on Mac OS X.
And the first time you try
running it on Mac OS X,
it usually crashes,
because Mac OS X is really good
at exposing bugs that were sort of
latent in your Mac OS 9 code base.
Well, you end up fixing those.
Those usually don't take too long,
because they're just typically writing
to null or other strange stuff like that.
You fix them,
you finally get the app to launch,
and it comes up,
and it looks kind of good,
but what's all that stuff going
wrong in my app's interface?
So I'm going to tell you how to
fix most of those problems today,
as well as certain techniques
to ease your adoption of Aqua,
and how to avoid certain
user interface pitfalls.
But before I go any further,
what I would like to do is show
off some of the user interface
pitfalls you might fall into.
And let's bring this up.
Okay, so what I have here is a small
application based on an earlier version
of PowerPlant that shows off some of
the problems you might run into when you
bring your application up under Aqua.
Now, the first thing you probably notice
when this dialog comes up is that
it's got a progress bar animating
in the top left-hand corner.
And initially, you might think, oh, okay,
that's right,
but then you look down in the bottom
right-hand corner and you see that,
well, your progress bar should
really be animating down there.
Why is it animating up in
the top left-hand corner?
You might also see this phenomenon with
the pulsing default button as well.
One thing that I hope
shows up on the big screen,
and I've got the Magnify
application running on the right
to kind of show it off more,
is the white halo problem.
If you look closely
at the Magnify window,
you can see that the pattern
shows up on the dialog,
but it doesn't show up
properly behind the text.
And speaking of text,
that text doesn't exactly
match the proper Aqua look.
It just looks too thin,
doesn't have the right anti-aliasing,
so you probably have that
in your application as well.
One other subtle problem
that you may not notice here,
until you look really, really closely,
is a misalignment of patterns.
If you take a look at the Magnify window,
you can sort of see strange
pattern alignment issues going
on on the checkbox glyph there.
It's almost as though the pattern
shifted down by a few pixels.
And speaking of these tabs
that the checkboxes are in,
the tab pane doesn't look quite right.
The tab pane is supposed to have
a border around the outside,
and it's supposed to have some
shadowing around the outside,
but it's just not showing up.
You might also see this same problem.
problem with shadows on push
buttons or other controls.
Another problem that doesn't often expose
itself until you use the application for
a while is over compositing of things
like focus rings and edit text frames.
If you take a look in the magnify
window as I tab back and forth,
[Transcript missing]
So the first thing I want to
talk about and show you how to
solve is the white halo problem.
Now like I mentioned,
it's basically when some other color
seems to surround your widgets,
your controls,
your static text items in a dialog that
otherwise has the proper line background.
Now fundamentally,
this is because of two things.
Controls erase their
background before they draw.
And the reason we have to
do this is because a lot of
Aqua widgets have shadows.
Under Platinum, they didn't often need to
erase behind themselves
because they were fully opaque,
but now we need to
erase in a lot of cases.
And so when a control is about to draw,
you need to make sure that the proper
background color has been set up
for that control so that the control
knows the right thing to erase to.
The best way to get the proper
background behind your control is to
properly exploit the Control Manager's
embedding hierarchy support.
Now, Control Manager embedding has
been around since Mac OS 8.0,
and a lot of people haven't
yet been exposed to it,
so I'm going to talk a
little bit about it now.
Essentially what the embedding
hierarchy is is a view system
in the Control Manager.
You can take controls,
put them into other controls,
move them around as a group.
It's just a mini view system.
It does hit testing properly,
drawing properly, things like that.
Now, when the Control Manager's
embedding stuff is working well,
and when you're utilizing it properly,
it will draw backgrounds
properly based on parent controls
that contain other controls.
For instance, you might have a push
button in a tab control.
When that push button goes to erase,
it traverses up the embedding hierarchy,
finds its parent that's a tab control,
and says, "Hey, tab control,
will you set the background up
properly for me so I can erase
now?" The tab control does that,
and then the button can go
ahead and erase and draw its
structure and lights gray.
If a control is embedded in such a
fashion that it isn't in a parent control
that has some sort of opaque background,
ultimately,
as the control traverses up the embedding
hierarchy to find the right background,
it might reach the root
pane for the window.
And if it does reach the
root pane for the window,
it uses a background that's been
associated with the window directly
via the setThemeWindowBackground API.
I'm going to talk a little bit more about
setThemeWindowBackground a bit later.
But basically,
what this API lets you do is associate
a certain pattern or brush with the
window such that a control that is
in this situation can erase to that
brush and get the right pattern.
So all the system CDEFs support
control embedding properly.
They do the right thing when
they're requested to have
background colors set up.
And if you have custom CDEFs and you want
to start taking advantage of embedding,
you can do the right thing here as well.
The best way to do this on
Mac OS X is to listen to the K-Event
Control Apply Background Carbon Event.
We talked a lot about
Carbon Event in previous sessions,
and one of our main points is
that in order to adopt current
and future Mac OS X technologies,
you're going to need to start
leveraging Carbon Events a lot more.
What just so happens is that if you
have an old school message based CDEF,
you don't need this particular
Carbon Event right now.
We do send out old CDEF messages
to your control definition
to set up the background.
You just have to do a
little bit more work.
If your control has a special background,
the first thing it needs to do
is tell the control manager,
"Hey, I've got a special background."
And the way you do that is by
reporting that you have the K control
has special background feature bit.
You're going to receive a control
message requesting your features.
You would set that bit on the
way out of the feature request.
Once you've responded that you
support a special background,
when the control manager is
trying to draw your sub-controls,
it will send you a K control
message setup background message.
In this message,
you can set up the current port
with the proper background so that
your sub-controls can draw properly.
Not everyone can take advantage of
the control embedding hierarchy fully.
A lot of frameworks have
their own view system,
and we're working on making it such
that you can integrate the view system
with the control manager more directly.
In the meantime, however,
you might not be able to fully
exploit control embedding,
but you still need to set
up the right background.
The way you do that is
with SetControlColorProc.
Simply speaking,
SetControlColorProc allows
you to associate a proc
pointer with a given control,
and that proc pointer will be called
to set up the background or the
text color for a given control.
This ControlColorProc can
actually be used in conjunction
with an embedding hierarchy.
If there's a color proc
associated with the control,
it will override the control manager's
embedding hierarchy support for color,
so you can hook in that way.
I also mentioned that SetControlColorProc
allows you to customize the text.
This also goes back to custom control
definitions responding to either the
Carbon event or the C-DEF message.
If you have a custom background,
let's say that it's totally opaque black,
and somebody puts a static
text control on top of that
complete opaque black control,
you need to make sure that
the text that that static
text control draws is visible.
The way you would do that
is probably by saying,
"Hey, draw your text in white."
SetControlColorProc will let you
set up a white text color as well.
Like I mentioned,
you can handle the proper
Carbon events or the C-DEF message
to do the same sort of thing.
Now,
sometimes setControlColorProc may not
do exactly what you want or it may
be a little bit of a hassle to use.
So as a last-ditch effort
you can always rely--well,
not always--you can sometimes rely on
the Control Manager's default behavior
of erasing to the current port.
If the Control Manager does not
have a color proc associated
with a given control,
and if the embedding hierarchy
doesn't have a color associated
with a given control,
and if there's no theme brush
associated with the Windows background,
we're just going to erase to whatever
color happens to be in the current port.
So if you're careful,
you can use APIs like
setThemeBackground--and I'm going
to talk a little bit more about that
later--you can use APIs like that
to prepare the current port before
you call any Control Manager API,
which might draw.
Now this is going to work in most cases,
but it flat out won't work
for animating controls.
And the reason is that animating
controls animate behind your back.
You won't have a chance
to preflight any color.
So you won't be able to use this
current port technique for things
like push buttons and progress bars
and the other animating controls.
Now another obvious problem you'll
probably notice as soon as your
application comes up is shadow clipping.
I showed it in that demo
application in the tab pane,
but this particular example shows
it happening on push buttons.
Generally speaking,
this is caused by applications
clipping to a control's bounds
before asking that control to draw.
In Aqua, however,
controls have shadows that lie
outside their control bounds,
and some controls, like pop-up buttons,
have traditionally drawn
outside their control bounds.
So in general,
clipping to a control's bounding
rectangle isn't going to cut it.
You're going to end up
cutting off shadows or worse.
PowerPlant is probably the most obvious
victim of this particular problem.
I know they're in the
process of fixing that.
I think they fixed it already, in fact.
So the way you fix this problem is
don't clip to the controls bounds,
but you might still have clipping needs.
You might still want to make sure
that the control doesn't draw willy
nilly all over the whole screen.
But you still need to give
the control the flexibility to
draw where it needs to draw.
And the way you do that is by asking
the control for its drawable area.
You can use the get control
region API along with the k
control structure meta part tag.
And this lets the control tell you, hey,
you know what?
I draw all over this area of the screen.
And this region is going to include
not only the sort of opaque structure,
but it'll also include the shadow
pixels and things like that.
So if you make sure to clip
to this structure region,
you will let the control draw
as much as it needs to draw.
Now, get control region is not just
useful for finding out where to clip.
Various controls support certain part
codes depending on the type of control.
And you can ask, for instance,
a tab control.
You can say, hey,
what's the region for your third tab?
And we also have another meta part,
which is called the k control content
meta part that many controls support.
And this allows you to query a
control for the region that its
subcontrol should be embedded into.
So you can do proper positioning
of your controls within a tab pane,
for instance.
So I actually should have
changed the title on this slide.
This is not just focus ring issues,
but this is also Edit Text Frames.
As I showed you on the demo,
as I was tabbing back and forth
between those edit text fields,
you could see the
Edit Text Frame get darker,
and darker, and darker, and darker.
And in some cases,
you'll see the same phenomenon
with the focus ring.
And essentially,
what this does is it just wrecks the
visual appearance of your API-- sorry,
of your interface.
It starts looking heavier, and heavier,
and heavier,
and it just doesn't fit in with Aqua.
And the reason this happens
is because certain appearance
primitives now draw with Alpha,
whereas in Platinum, they did not.
And the two best examples are focus
rings and the Edit Text Frame.
If you're going to draw either of these--
Use either of these primitives to
draw your focus rings and your frames.
You need to make sure you
erase before you draw.
Now erase is a little bit of a lie.
What you might actually need to
do is draw the background or draw
whatever happens to lie behind your
focus ring or frame because it might
not just be a simple background.
So in the demo app I showed you,
the progress bar was animating
in the total wrong location,
but probably a worse instance of
this is when your OK button that
should be down in the nice bottom
right hand corner of your screen
according to the proper UI guidelines,
all of a sudden jumps up to the
top left and starts pulsing.
And that's a really quick
indication that something's wrong.
Fundamentally,
this is caused by a non-zero-zero origin
in the window that you're dealing with.
And this non-zero-zero origin can
also cause pattern misalignment,
like I showed you in the checkbox.
But you might be thinking to yourself,
well,
I've been changing the origin for years.
Heck, PowerPlant does it,
my framework does it,
our custom application code does it.
It was working fine, right?
Well, it was behaving fine,
but it really wasn't working fine.
If Platinum,
if you tried to draw controls
on top of patterns or other
pictures under Mac OS 9,
you would have seen this
same problem happen.
It just so happened that in most cases
you end up drawing with a solid color,
so you didn't see the phenomenon.
And generally speaking,
it's practically impossible to do
willy-nilly origin changes to your
window on Mac OS X because you're
going to run into these two problems.
But you have good reasons for
wanting to change the origin.
I mean, it's a valuable tool, right?
So there are safe ways to do that.
The one thing you need to keep in mind
is that the control manager really,
really, really wants a zero-zero origin
associated with the window that
it's drawing its controls in.
And in fact, every control's bounding
rectangle must be relative to a
zero-zero origin in order for the
control manager to work properly.
For instance,
if you have a default button in the
bottom right-hand corner of your
window and you want it at position 200,
300 relative to the window's top left,
you need to make sure the control's
bounding rectangle is 200,
300.
If you do need to change the origin,
you want to make sure you
save and restore it properly.
The way to do so is very straightforward.
In order to determine what
a port's current origin is,
unfortunately we don't have
an API for that directly,
but what you do is you get
the port's bounding rectangle,
just save off the top left
corner of the bounding rectangle.
That's its origin.
Then you can change the origin
to whatever you need it to be,
do your setup and other drawing.
When you're done drawing,
restore the origin to
the way it was before.
Let me go into a little bit
more background about why
the pulsing buttons jump,
just to give you a better feel of
exactly why this problem happens.
If you have your control with a
bounding rectangle whose top left is 0,
0, and your framework or your application
would make sure to adjust the
origin such that it's negative 200,
300 before it draws the control,
hoping that the control really will draw
down 200 pixels down and 300 pixels down.
If you have a bounding rectangle
with 300 pixels to the right
of the window's origin,
that's going to work if and only if you
have explicit time to set up the port
before you ask that control to draw.
However, because controls draw in timers,
you don't have that pre-flight chance.
In fact, when a control's timer fires,
it can't make any assumptions
about the current port.
This is also a general rule
you'll need to follow yourselves
when using Carbon event timers.
A timer might be firing
at some totally odd time,
like when menus are down or when
you're tracking in another control.
Therefore,
the origin may have been set up
to do something totally different,
and your timer needs to set the
origin and things like the clip
to something very predictable.
And the control manager,
for predictability's sake,
sets the origin to 0, 0.
Therefore, if your button's top
left-hand corner is 0,
0, well, your button's going to draw
at the top left-hand corner of
the screen-- or of the window,
sorry.
Pattern alignment is not the
only pattern issue you're going
to run into in all likelihood.
Sometimes you'll want
to draw with a pattern,
you've got to color instead.
Other times you'll want to
draw the opposite direction.
You've got to color and
you wanted a pattern.
Other times you'll just see
strange gray backgrounds,
which look great in platinum,
but why are they coming
up in my Aqua interface?
And worse yet is a System 7
white background that's probably
been in your application for
about the last five years.
The reason this happens is
because backgrounds under Aqua can
be either colors or patterns.
And your application needs to be aware
of that and needs to be expecting it.
Quick Draw's behavior when there
is a pattern in the current port
is to draw using that pattern,
not necessarily the color you've set up.
So if you use an Appearance
Manager API to set up a
pattern for your window,
and then a little while later you
change the color to white because
you want to draw some area white,
then you go to erase and all of
a sudden the pattern comes up,
but I just set the color to white,
why is this pattern coming up?
Well, simply speaking,
that's because the pattern
is still in the port,
and that's what
Quick Draw is going to use.
So in order to make sure that
you don't have unwanted patterns
associated with the current port,
you can call Normalize
Theme Drawing State.
Now this API was introduced in,
I believe, the Mac OS 8.5 timeframe,
and it was designed to just do a quick
wipe of the current port settings,
such that it's in a very predictable,
clean drawing state.
It will make sure to eliminate
any pattern that's in the port.
It will set the
foreground color to black,
the background color to white,
and tweak a few other things
to make it more predictable.
Now, these theme drawing state
APIs also have a saver and restore,
which are very useful if you want to
make sure you don't disrupt the system's
use of patterns in some callback or
possibly in a Carbon event handler.
And you use the save theme drawing state
and restore theme drawing state to save
and restore the theme drawing state.
They will pass back out an opaque
reference to a whole bunch of settings.
You hang on to these settings.
You can do your own port preparation,
often with normalized theme
drawing state or other preparation.
Do your drawing,
and finally when you're done,
you call restore theme drawing
state and pass in the opaque object,
and it'll set things back
up the way they were before.
Now, if you happen to be drawing gray
backgrounds in your windows just because,
well, that's what you always did and
that's what looked right in Platinum
and I didn't know we had to use
these Appearance Manager APIs,
well, you know what?
You've got to use these Appearance
Manager APIs to draw the Aqua patterns.
And in fact,
these same Appearance Manager APIs will
let you draw the right thing
on CarbonLib on Mac OS 9.
The Appearance Manager supports a
whole bunch of different backgrounds
and they're tagged at sort of a
high level with the notion of theme
brushes and theme backgrounds.
Theme brushes are, like I said,
used in a high level way.
You tell the Appearance
Manager what sort of background
for what case you're drawing in.
You might say,
"I'm drawing in an active dialog
right now," or "I'm drawing a toolbar
background right now," or even,
"I want to draw a bevel
button center fill.
Can you please set that up for me?"
We've got several dozen theme brushes
and theme backgrounds in Appearance.h.
You can go ahead and take
a look there and see which
ones you want to start using.
In general, you want to use the dialog,
alert, utility window,
toolbar backgrounds, things like that.
That'll get you the proper Aqua lines
on Mac OS X and on Platinum
they'll draw the proper gray.
The way you use these is
typically through set theme
background and set theme pen.
Set theme background takes a theme brush.
It talks to the Appearance Manager,
figures out what color or pattern needs
to be applied to the current port,
and then applies it to the current port.
Set theme background applies
it to the background,
so you can follow that up with
an erase rect or any other
Quick Draw API that might erase.
Set theme pen applies
it to the foreground,
so you can follow that up with any
Quick Draw routine that's going to paint.
As I mentioned before, there's this
Set Theme Window Background API.
How is this different
from Set Theme Background,
you might ask?
Set Theme Window Background associates
a theme brush with a window
on a permanent basis.
You can come in later and call
Set Theme Window Background again
and set up a different
theme brush to that window,
but generally speaking,
it's remembered until your next
call to Set Theme Window Background.
Whereas Set Theme Background transiently
just applies this background
setting to the port and it
can get stomped upon later.
Now the other cool aspect about
Set Theme Window Background is
it lets the window manager
be a lot more efficient.
Because there's this brush constant
permanently associated with the window,
the window manager can use it when
it needs to paint a window as it
comes on screen for the first time.
This saves a lot of time
and a lot of your hassle
because in a normal situation,
the window might paint white and
then later you'll get an update of
it and then you'll draw the lines.
And you really don't want
to be seeing that sort of
flicker on Mac OS X under Aqua.
It's kind of crummy.
So you can start using the
Set Theme Window Background API to
associate a theme brush with your window.
There's one other
Theme Background API and that's
called Apply Theme Background.
And it's a little bit different.
It's essentially similar to
Set Theme Background in that it
takes a theme background constant
and shoves the right color or
pattern into the current port.
But the difference here is that
Apply Theme Background also takes a
rectangle to align that background to.
The classic example of
this is a background.
The background that fills a tab
pane doesn't want to align to the
window's top left-hand corner.
It wants to align to the top left-hand
corner of the tab pane itself.
So that's why you need to pass in
a particular bounding rectangle.
And we've got several theme
backgrounds that are useful
for Apply Theme Background in
the right sorts of cases.
You can take a look at
Appearance.h to find those as well.
So non-Aqua text is
sort of a sticky issue.
When you bring your app up,
you see all these really wacky white halo
problems and really ugly visual things.
You fix all those and you go, yeah,
I think I'm done.
I think I got it ready.
But you kind of glossed over the fact
that your text doesn't quite match up.
And you might be really tempted to
just leave your application that way,
but please don't.
It looks really,
really crummy compared to
the rest of the Aqua text.
And there's another downside in
that the ugly text is not only ugly,
but it's totally Unicode unsavvy.
It's drawn with Mac encoding characters.
You can't have mixed run strings.
Your file system might have a file name
that has five different languages in it
using five different fonts to display it.
And if you try to render it with
the APIs you're currently using,
you're going to just get jumbled garbage
and it's going to look just horrible.
And the reason it looks bad is
because you're using the old
Quick Draw text drawing APIs.
There's a number of ways you can make
your text look really good under Aqua.
The most straightforward way is to
adopt the system control definitions,
window definitions,
and menu definitions as much as possible.
The more you adopt those,
the less work you have
to do in the first place.
All of these devprocs have been revved
to use AquaText where it makes sense.
There's actually a few
exceptions to this.
The most obvious one is the
old school EditText control.
The old school EditText control
is going to forever draw with
QuickDrawText because it's
forever associated with TextEdit.
We're not bringing TextEdit forward,
so if you really want to do
proper Aqua-savvy text editing,
you should use the
Unicode EditText control.
Like the rest of our AquaText story,
not only does it look good,
but it also fully supports Unicode in
multiple languages and stuff like that.
And if you have certain static text
areas on your screen that you're using
Quick Draw Text APIs to draw directly,
one easy way to make those
Aqua-savvy is to begin using
the Static Text C-Def instead.
The Static Text C-Def is really
good for simple needs when you just
want to draw a little caption or
a little label on top of something.
And using the Control Manager's
embedding support,
it'll let you draw on top of
most arbitrary backgrounds.
And if you don't like the overhead
of using a control or if you need
a little bit of a quicker solution,
you can always use the Theme Text APIs.
I'm going to talk a little bit
more about that in a slide or two.
And if that doesn't work out for you,
you can always use ATSUI or MLTE.
Now these are the lowest level ways for
a Carbon app to draw Aqua-savvy text.
It's a little more
complex to set up and use,
but it gives you a heck of
a lot more flexibility and a
little bit better performance.
The downside of using these APIs is
there is not currently a way to
make your application more flexible.
You can always use the
Theme Text API to get the proper
theme fonts for given situations
to use them with ATSUI and MLTE.
This is something that we're
going to add in the future,
but for right now,
if you use ATSUI and MLTE,
you might see a few strangenesses when
you try to render mixed language text.
So the quick and easy solution
to get this Aqua text is
via the theme text APIs.
We've got APIs to do drawing
and measuring and truncation,
and essentially they're meant to be very
easy replacements for the quick draw text
routines you've already been used to.
If you're using draw text or
draw string or TE text box,
you'll want to use draw theme text box.
Likewise, if you're using text width
or get theme font info to
determine widths and heights,
you can use get theme text dimensions.
Now, certain theme text draws
shadow outside of it.
Two best examples are window
title bars and push button fonts.
And you can determine the amount
outside of your text that the
shadow will draw via the get
theme text shadow outside API.
This returns a rectangle,
and each of the fields of the
rectangle tells you how far out each
of the sides the shadows will draw,
so you can take that into
account if you need to clip or
do some other stuff like that.
And if you were using trunk string
or trunk text to do your truncation,
you can use get theme text box
to determine widths and heights.
So if you're using draw text or
draw string or get theme text box,
you'll want to use draw theme text
box to determine widths and heights.
If you're using draw text or draw
string or get theme text box to
determine widths and heights,
you can use get theme text box
to determine widths and heights.
easily switch over to
Truncate Theme Text.
All of these Theme Text APIs are
Unicode savvy.
They take CFStrings,
and they're fairly easy to use.
I tried to model them
after the Quick Draw text
routines that they replaced,
so they're pretty easy to just
swap in and out very easily.
All of these theme text APIs also
take the notion of a theme font ID.
Theme font IDs have actually
been around for a while.
The Appearance Manager supports
a way of asking,
"What font will I draw on if
I want to draw on the system
font?" We had this support,
I believe, in the Mac OS 8 timeframe.
We took these theme font IDs forward,
added a whole bunch more,
and what they essentially are is
and I'll take away for you to
say you know what I want to draw
a push button font or I want to
draw on the system font or I want
to draw on the window title font.
And the cool thing about the theme font
IDs is not only do they specify one font,
they also specify that font
size and its shadowing effects.
But even cooler,
it will resolve to more than one font
if the string you are about to render
has more than one language in it.
You can give us one CFString that
contains Roman text,
Japanese text, in the future Korean text
and stuff like that.
And we will render that one string in
multiple fonts as we see it's necessary.
And of course,
if you call the measuring APIs,
we're going to return accurate
measurements for all the variety of
fonts that we're going to end up using.
Now, the theme font IDs that we offer is
only a family of about a dozen of them,
and you might have more custom needs.
If you have custom needs, you can use the
KThemeCurrentPortMetaFont.
This meta font lets you set
up the current port with
whatever text font size,
style, and face you want,
and the Appearance Manager routines
will pull that information
out of the current port,
map it into the right
data structures for ATSUI,
and end up rendering Aqua text with it.
Unfortunately, there's a few limitations.
It doesn't support all styles.
We don't support outline and shadow
styles because the underlying engine,
ATSUI, doesn't support either of those.
And likewise, you don't get the proper
Aqua shadowing effects.
The only way to get Aqua shadowing
effects is to use the theme font ID,
which maps to one of
those shadowing effects.
And the last downside is that it's
got suboptimal Unicode support.
If you pass in a Unicode string
with multiple languages in it,
we're going to do our best to
guess the right fonts for that,
and we're going to
accurately render the glyphs,
but the fonts we choose
to render other text in,
let's say Japanese text or Korean text,
if you're in an otherwise
Roman application,
those fonts may not match visually
very well with the one font you
specified in the current port.
So that's one of the drawbacks
to using the current port font.
You'll want to stick with
the higher level theme font
consonants as much as you can.
Now the Theme Text APIs don't
actually do anything with the color.
Theme Font IDs don't
actually imply a color.
We let you choose what color you want to
draw the text in entirely on your own.
And the easiest way to do this is
via the Set Theme Text Color API.
Set Theme Text Color,
like the Draw Theme Text APIs,
has a constant, a family of constants,
which lets you tell us what sort of
thing you're trying to draw text on.
You can say,
"I'm trying to draw text on my active
dialog," or "I'm trying to draw text on
an inactive dialog," and those two theme
text colors will resolve into different
raw colors to draw the font with.
In the active case,
we're going to draw with black.
In the inactive case,
we're going to draw with the proper gray.
We have a whole bunch of these theme
text colors pretty much on a one-to-one
correspondence with the various theme
buttons and theme font IDs that you might
be used to from the Appearance Manager.
Now, if you've had a chance to
use the Theme Text APIs,
most of you probably said, "Yeah,
this works.
This is pretty good." But some of
you might be trying to draw a whole
lot of text in a given window.
And, well, you know,
the Theme Text APIs are
going to be a little slow.
There are a couple ways to deal with
this and make the Theme Text APIs faster.
The best way is to take advantage
of the CGContextRef parameter that
DrawThemeTextBox allows you to pass in.
If you've had a chance to attend
any of the Quartz drawing sessions,
you'll know that a CG Context
Ref is an opaque reference.
It's kind of like a Quartz graph port.
It stores all your drawing
settings that you want to use.
If you don't pass one of these
into the Draw Theme Text Box API,
we're going to create one for you.
And that's okay.
We're going to even pull certain
settings out of the current port
and apply them to the context,
and that's also okay.
The problem is that it
takes a little bit of time.
So if you have 50 calls to
Draw Theme Text Box and you pass a
null context ref to each of those,
we're going to end up creating a context,
syncing it with the
current port 50 times.
And that's just some performance
issues you don't want to run into.
If you want to bypass this,
the right thing to do is create
your context ahead of time,
set it up the way you want it with
the proper color and the proper
clipping and stuff like that,
and then pass that one context in to each
of your 50 Draw Theme Text Box calls.
That's probably going to solve
a majority of your needs.
But one thing I found when I was revving
certain parts of the system to use these
theme text routines is that they use
the measuring and truncation routines
multiple times before each draw.
The static text control, for instance,
might measure its bounds twice,
once to figure out
what rectangle to clip,
and then it might measure the text
again to know what rectangle to
pass in to draw a theme text box.
Well, that's silly,
and if your application
is doing the same thing,
it should really stop.
Every call to the measurement
routine is actually fairly expensive.
We're working on making that a lot
faster through things like caching,
but in general,
if you have redundant calls
to the measuring routines or
even the drawing routines,
I found a few cases in my
own code where I had that,
you want to eliminate them.
And cache.
The measurement values, if you can.
For instance,
if you're drawing a static text item,
you might calculate the bounds
for that static text item once,
store it off in your object pointer
that represents that static text item,
and then use that bounding
rectangle every time you draw.
You don't even need to measure
every time before you draw,
because you've already
done the measurement once.
One other thing we're working
on besides the caching,
I want to make a way possible such
that you can use ATSUI and MLTE in
a proper theme font fashion,
so it gives you total low-level
custom control as well as the
proper Unicode font stuff.
That's not available now,
but it's something I'm looking at
for the relatively near future.
I've talked a lot about the
Control Manager in the session so far,
but a lot of the same principles
apply to the Appearance Manager.
You can draw virtually any widget
that the Control Manager draws with
the Appearance Manager primitives.
We've got low-level primitives
for drawing buttons,
for drawing edit text frames,
focus rings, tabs, group boxes,
all sorts of stuff.
And the important thing to realize
is you're going to run into the same
sorts of visual issues if you draw
with the Appearance Manager primitives.
The Appearance Manager draws with Alpha.
The Appearance Manager sometimes
needs to erase.
You need to be aware of
both of these things,
and some of the Appearance
Manager APIs allow you to
pass in a ThemeErase proc.
This ThemeErase proc gives you a
chance to erase properly before the
Appearance Manager needs to render.
And again,
that erase should be in quotes because
sometimes you're not literally erasing,
you're drawing something behind the
new widget you're trying to draw.
And likewise,
the Appearance Manager will draw outside
of the bounding rectangles you give it.
If you give the Appearance
Manager a 20 pixel tall bounding
rectangle to draw a button,
well, the shadow's going to go
outside that bounding rectangle.
And the way you determine how
far outside is to use an API like
Get Theme Button Background Bounds.
This particular API tells
you how far out,
at the extreme case,
a given widget will draw.
And so you can do clipping or whatever
else you need to do with that.
And lastly,
we offer a new API as part of Carbon in
Mac OS X called Get Theme Metrics.
Generally speaking widgets under Aqua are
about the same size under Platinum,
but there are a few exceptions.
I think the tabs and tab
panes are a few pixels taller.
The amount that a focus
ring draws outside the input
rectangle is a little bit wider.
Edit text frames actually don't
draw as far outside the bounding
rectangle as they did on Platinum,
but they draw inside the
rectangle somewhat now,
too.
And we offer theme metrics for you
to ask for this sort of information.
There's probably, wow,
five or six dozen theme
metrics in the headers.
You can find out how tall the tabs are,
how much an individual
tab overlaps the tab pane,
stuff like that.
Alright,
so I've talked about the Control Manager,
I've talked about the Appearance Manager,
and they're pretty much equal,
but which one should you use?
Generally speaking,
you want to use the Control Manager.
There are some things that the Appearance
Manager just can't do for you right now.
In some cases,
the Control Manager implements
certain things directly itself.
The best example of this
is the pulsing button.
There is no way to draw a properly
pulsing button on Mac OS X right now
if you use the Appearance Primitives.
You must draw with the
Control Manager if you want those.
But in the rest of the cases,
the Appearance Manager works very,
very well.
All right,
so you heard about the problems.
Well, what do you do now?
The best thing is go out
there and start aquafying.
If you got a chance to see John's
session yesterday on adopting Aqua,
Aqua's totally leveled the playing field.
A lot of applications are
just getting on board now.
And this is your chance to go out there
and really polish your user interface,
and really step over your competition,
and show, hey, you know what,
we've got this great interface.
And the users will really like that.
A crummy interface really
taints the user experience.
First time you launch an app,
you see all these funky visual problems.
You're going to go, whoa, well,
they didn't spend much time
working on the interface.
I wonder how much time they
spent working on the code.
Is this app going to crash?
And it just puts a bad
taste in your mouth.
So you want to make sure your application
is as Aqua pretty as possible.
Take advantage of shadowing
as much as you can.
Do the theme text stuff
And the final word I want to make
is that the Carbon high-level
toolbox is a perfect way to
deliver Carbon applications.
Yeah, we've got a few shortcomings,
but we're working on that.
But I want to assure you that we're
bringing the high-level toolbox forward.
You saw yesterday's window
and menu manager session.
We've added a lot of features there.
We've added a bunch of features
in the control manager.
I'm going to talk about it
at the session after this.
And we're going to continue enriching
the control window menu and all
the high-level toolbox managers.
So with that, I would like to do some
Q&A and go through the roadmap.
And so I'll bring up John Galenzi.
Great, thanks Guy.
So the roadmap just talks about
some other sessions that relate to
this material and that relate to the
topic of user experience on Mac OS X.
The second session,
which is just right after
this one right here,
so you don't even need to move,
is 120 Controls & Appearance,
where Guy's just going to keep
talking about the same sort of stuff,
dock, animating dock icons,
that sort of stuff,
and continue on this track.
And then the feedback forum
for the high-level toolbox.
It's a great opportunity for you to
come and give your feedback as to
things that you think are missing in
terms of controls or functionality
within the Appearance Manager,
whatever relates to
the high-level toolbox.
Then session 112,
which is today at 2:00 PM, I believe.
No, that was yesterday at 2:00 PM,
so watch it on DVD.
Designing and using Aqua Icons.
I talked about that one at the
end of my session 111 yesterday,
which is a great session to come to to
learn how to critique the icons that
are being designed for your application.
Then today, Apple Help.
Learning about how to do a good
help system and provide user
assistance with your product on 10.
And then Speech Recognition
and Synthesis.
Fantastic session to learn how to
add speech synthesis or recognition
to your application and really
extend the user experience on 10.
And then yesterday's 114,
which if you didn't get there,
watch it on DVD.
and then some other sessions that
were yesterday or the day before.
So let's get into the Q&A.
This is my contact information.
If you have any comments about this
session or if you have feedback
in terms of what's supported
within High Level Toolbox or within
Carbon in terms of user interface,
please get in touch with me.